# Motorspeech2024

**Speaking rate and intelligibility in children’s speech**

Poster for our presentation at the 2022 Motor Speech conference in San
Diego, CA.


## Abstract

Prior work has documented how children’s intelligibility and
articulation rate increased over the childhood years. We asked whether
speaking rate influenced intelligibility in a sample of 538 typically
developing children between ages 2;6 and 9;11 (years;months). Because
utterance length can influence intelligibility (more words providing
additional sentence context) and rate (more words requiring more
efficient speech in a single fluent utterance), we stratified rate and
intelligibility scores by utterance length. We found a small negative
effect of speaking rate on intelligibility at younger ages for longer
utterance lengths. For example, at age 4;0, an increase in rate of .5
syllables per second predicted a corresponding decrease in
intelligibility of 3–5 percentage points on 5–7-word utterances. For
shorter items or for children older than age 5, this rate effect is
negligible. Implications will be discussed.

## Slide of the week

(A modified version of the primary figure from the poster was used for
the UW–Madison Waisman Center slide of the week.)

**Expected intelligibility decreases with speaking rate for younger
children and longer utterances**

![four panel figure described below][sotw]

*Intelligibility as a function of speaking rate and age in different
utterance lengths.* Typically developing children produced 4–7-word
utterances in a repetition task. We measured their speaking rate in
syllables per second, and their intelligibility as the proportion of
words correctly transcribed by two listeners. Points represent observed
data with 1 point per child per panel. Lines represent the expected
marginal mean for the central age in each age bin (i.e., age 3;0 for
the 2;6–3;5 bin). Within each panel, we see the lines stacked in the
expected order: Children become more intelligible with age. The vertical
black line on each line is the median speaking rate for children in the
age bin, and the thicker region of the line marks the 25%–75% percentile
range. Within each panel, we see the medians move from left to right
with age: Children's habitual speaking rate increases with age. All the
lines follow a flat or slightly negative slope, indicating that
increases in speaking rate predict decreases in intelligibility. This
effect is small to negligible in the three oldest age bins, but for
younger children and for longer utterances, the trend suggests a
speed-accuracy tradeoff for habitual speech production.

## Disclosures

Tristan Mahr worked on this project while employed by the UW–Madison
Waisman Center. He has no relevant nonfinancial relationships to
disclose.

Katherine Hustad received a research grant from the NIH to collect these
data. She has no relevant nonfinancial relationships to disclose.

## License

GPL-3 license intended for source-code (.R) files. Other creative
material (words and images) is CC BY licensed:
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>.


[sotw]: ./slide-of-the-week/2024-03-mahr-hustad-slide-of-week-1200.png "Expected intelligibility decreases with speaking rate for younger children and longer utterances"
